---
layout: page
title: "Handling CORS Requests"
category: http
date: 2016-06-19 21:22:35
order: 8
---

All request controllers have built-in behavior for handling CORS requests from a browser. When a preflight request is received from a browser (an OPTIONS request with Access-Control-Request-Method header and Origin headers), any request controller receiving this request will immediately pass it on to its `nextController`. The final controller listening to the stream will use its policy to validate and return a response to the HTTP client. This allows the final responding controller - typically a subclass of `HTTPController` - to determine CORS policy.

Every `RequestController` has a `policy` property, of type `CORSPolicy`. The `policy` has properties for configuring CORS options for that particular endpoint. By having a `policy`, every `RequestController` automatically implements logic to respond to preflight requests without any additional code.

Policies can be set at the controller level or at the application level. The static property `CORSPolicy.defaultPolicy` can be modified at initialization time to set the CORS options for every controller.

```dart
class MyRequestSink extends RequestSink {
  MyRequestSink(ApplicationConfiguration config) : super(config) {
    CORSPolicy.defaultPolicy.allowedOrigins = ["http://mywebsite.com/"];
  }
}
```

The default policy is very permissive: POST, PUT, DELETE and GET are allowed methods. All origins are valid (\*).

Each individual controller can override or replace the default policy by modifying its own `policy` in its constructor.

```dart
class MyHTTPController extends HTTPController {
  MyHTTPController() {
    policy.allowedMethods = ["POST"];
  }
}
```
